Basically, when people talk about
memory management in practice,
what they tend to mean
is this question of.
When is it safe to mark something
on the heap as no longer in use.
Allocating stuff on the heap,
It's definitely non trivial.
There's a good bit of
logic going on in there.
But it's not particularly tricky.
Generally speaking.
Figuring out when it's safe to
free memory is a lot trickier.
So, let's walk through an example of this.
So, let's say I have a function
called get final orders and
returns in i64 and
it makes this vec of orders.
So 1, 2, 3, 4.
Let's say,
these are counts of like different orders.
Some sort of ordering system and
we've got total order is 0.
That's defined as mutable.
Then we iterate through
each of the orders and
we say total orders plus equals orders.
And then finally,
we call some function called finish,
which does some sort of finishing
calculation on the total orders.
And then we finally return that.
Okay.
So, this is a function where almost
everything that's happening here
is happening on the stack.
There's only one heap allocation
we're doing which is this vec macro.
Everything else is just basic arithmetic.
We're iterating over that thing and
we're calling finished passing an integer.
So lots of stack stuff, but
only one particular heap interaction here.
So this is our sort of one call
to alloc in the whole thing.
And the question is, where if
anywhere do we want to that memory?
Where is it safe for us to say,
hey, bookkeeping system.
These four bytes,
they are no longer in use,
you can totally feel free to use them for
whatever you want.
Because, I'm not gonna
use them anymore and
you can release them back to the program.
Now importantly,
we do have the option of saying,
hey, you know what,
just never deallocate anything.
We're only gonna ever do alloc and
we're just going to forget about the whole
freeing up once we're
done with that thing.
Just alloc and
that's all we're gonna have.
You can do this but this creates
what's known as a memory leak.
where basically the longer your
program runs, it keeps doing more and
more allocations.
But it never actually freeze anything,
even things that are no
longer in use anymore.
Which means that your programs memory
usage goes up and up and then eventually,
if you're unlucky, your program
runs completely out of memory.
Or, as is more common, you just noticed
that your system starts getting really
slow and you're like,
what's what's using all my memory?
And you look in some program is
using a huge amount of memory.
Maybe it's because it actually
needs all that memory but
sometimes it could be because
of a memory leak like this.
Where you allocate something and
don't deallocate it.
So, we do want to deallocate things once
we're done with them to prevent memory
leaks because memory
leaks are undesirable.
So, the question then becomes, when,
when do we deallocate this vec.
So, because it's not on the stack because
it's on the heap deallocation is not going
to happen automatically.
We actually need to and
by we, I mean rust,
somebody needs to call a dealloc
function at the appropriate time.
In the manual memory management world
like this is basically what's done in C,
you actually literally call
this function yourself.
In C the function is called malloc.
Not alloc short for memory allocate.
But basically in C, you actually
literally do call malloc yourself and
then you call a function called
free which is like dealloc.
Which basically says, okay, I'm done with
this memory, you can have it back now.
And you actually have to decide on
your own where to put those things.
So, let's say that I was
doing this in the C style.
This is not how we do it in rust,
but just for the sake of example,
let's say that I decided to
free those bytes right here.
So I said, okay.
We allocated the orders up here and
then I de-allocated them right here
before returning final orders.
That would work.
Sure, no problem.
Because at this point, I mean,
we're done with the orders.
We, in fact, the last time we used them
was back up in here when we reiterated
them, so, it's no problem if
we deallocate them right here.
If this works like everything's good,
we allocate it, we deallocate it.
When this function returns,
the heap is totally cleared out.
All the new stuff we introduce has
been marked as no longer in use, and
everybody's happy.
Great.
Now, let's say that instead,
I decided to deallocate it here.
That's the thing you could do and see.
So, I'm running through my
back here I allocated up here.
And then I say, let my total reach 00 and
I deallocate orders, and
then I iterate through the orders.
That doesn't sound good.
It allocated it.
So, what bad things could happen there?
Well, you remember back when we talked
about our sort of mental map of memory.
Now we have all the ones and zeros and
some of them are sort of marked
as in use and others are not.
And we've seen both on the stack and
on the heap that basically,
the memory management system is or the
bookkeeping system is just going to say,
hey, this thing is available
this thing is not.
So, if we've told it
this thing is available.
There could be code
running in another thread.
comes along and says, what?
I just realized that
this is available memory.
Great.
I wanna I want to put it back there.
I'm gonna write the numbers 7259 and
1200 into that.
And then when I go through and
iterate it instead of it being
1234 it's now like 5729.
And you know, 2400 I'm like, What?
What are these crazy numbers?
I said 1234 and now I'm getting totally
bananas like ridiculous numbers that had
nothing to do with what I put in there.
Why is that happening?
Well, what happened was that I
deallocated it which told the bookkeeping
system this was available.
And some other part of my program
that was running in parallel,
wrote into that memory and
now I'm in trouble.
It's not even necessarily
another part of my program.
If I have like another
function call in here.
That could also happen.
So, this is what's called a use after
free which basically means using memory
after it's been marked as free
in the bookkeeping system.
That's to say available.
And these are really nasty bugs.
I remember a long time ago when
I was writing an RPG and in C,
I had this symptom where sometimes you
would go into this one town in the game.
And instead of having a menu of items
to be able to buy, the shopkeeper
would just spewed gibberish at you just
like random got like ASCII garbage.
And I eventually figured out that what had
happened was I've had to use after free
somewhere.
And so, contents of that store were
getting overwritten by random memory
garbage from somewhere
else was really bad.
And they're really,
really hard to track down.
So, this is why people generally prefer
not to do manual memory management
like this.
If you put the dealloc in the wrong place,
it can cause a use after free which
are really, really nasty bugs.
Okay.
So, this is a use after free bug.
We don't want one.
This is a kind of illustration
of what we just talked about.
We allocate the thing and
then somebody else writes into this
memory that we had marked as unused.
And now when we iterate through it,
we're seeing the wrong stuff.
So, however, if we deallocate down here,
again, not a problem,
because we're past the point where
we're iterating over orders.
So, the fact that it's free
now really has no downside.
Now what if we did this?
What if we said I'm gonna do it down here.
And also I'm gonna do it up here as well.
Why not just deallocate it more like
let's, if one is good, two must be better.
Right?
Well, this actually creates a different
type of bug known as a double free and
believe it or not double frees can
be even worse than use after frees.
So, here's what can
happen in a double free.
First I say, deallocate these orders.
Now what that means in practice is
what deallocate takes is it takes
the particular memory index.
Like from that vec metadata
struct of the first element
of the the numbers that are in that vec.
It says, yeah, make that memory address.
Make that marked as free.
Says, okay, no problem.
And so, then it's going through and
saying, all right,
I've marked those as free.
Now let's go on let's
keep running our program.
And somewhere inside finish,
let's say that this finished
function call is asking for avec.
And again, the bookkeeping system says,
good news.
We have this thing called orders.
I found some some nice space for your vec.
I'm gonna assign you to
that indexing on the heap.
So it's great.
So, then finish goes and
populates that that vec that memory index.
And then the next thing we
do after this as we go and
mark that same memory index, which now
belongs to finish, as freed again.
So now, we've created a use after free for
someone else.
We've actually created accidentally
created a use after free for
whatever finish was doing.
And so, this is basically not only is it a
use after free but it's a use after free.
That's even harder to diagnose than
a regular use after free which are already
really nasty.
Because the culprit for the cause of
use after free isn't actually even in
the function that's allocating
the thing in the first place.
So, double frees can be even worse even
nastier to debug than use after free.
And definitely they can cause those
same kinds of symptoms where you just
see random memory gibberish around.
So, fortunately, rust does not ask
us to do manual memory management.
That would be pretty unpleasant.
Instead, rust is going to figure out
where to insert the dealloc just in
the right place.
So, that there's no chance of a use after
free and no chance of a double free.
Really everything we've
been building up to,
to this point is kind of building up to
how rust decides when to free memory.
That's sort of this crucial question
that really separates a lot of different
programming languages in terms of
performance and in terms of reliability.
Okay.
So.
Note, manual memory management
like this is notorious for
causing really serious not just bugs but
also security problems.
So ,in 2018, Microsoft ran a study
of critical vulnerabilities and
their causes over the past, like 12 years.
So, this is going back to 2006.
So, the dark blue line, that is to say
that most of this stuff that is about 70%,
were caused by memory safety problems.
Which is to say that things like
use after free or double free or,
in other cases buffer overruns.
But basically different problems
related to manual memory management and
dealing with memory manually like this.
And everything else put
together was around 30%.
So, not all of these are used after frees.
Not all these are double frees.
But the point is that, manual memory
management and dealing with that stuff
manually, like like people have done for
a very long time.
And see, it's not just a matter
of performance and convenience.
It's actually something that can really
seriously cause security problems for
your program.
So, it's error prone,
people make mistakes with it.
And some of those errors
cause security problems.
So this is one of the things
that rust advocates like
to point to as a really
big selling point of rust.
Is that, it's a way to get this same
level of performance is CNC plus plus.
Without nearly the risk of
critical vulnerabilities.
So, a lot of languages though,
what they will do is they'll do
what's called garbage collection.
You've probably heard this term.
So, garbage collection is absolutely
a way of deciding when to free memory.
So, here's how this is working
like a garbage collected language.
So like, JavaScript is garbage collected,
Python, Ruby, Java.
Basically all of the like top 10 most
popular languages, except for C and
c++ are garbage collected languages.
So, what they do is when they allocate,
they actually go to the garbage collector
which has its own bookkeeping system.
It has a little bit of extra overhead.
So this is one of the downsides
of garbage collection is that,
the allocation system
the bookkeeping system for
garbage collectors tends to have
more overhead per allocation.
Then the type that C and c++ and rust use.
They both do have some overhead though.
So, it says okay, hey, garbage collector,
I wanna allocate this thing.
And then basically,
eventually you see this.
A giant beach ball like your
program grinds to a halt and
what's happening there is
what's known as a GC pause.
Right, garbage collection pause.
And what's happening is
basically that at some point,
the garbage collector runs and
it says, I need to go and track down.
It's like it's been a while
since we freed any memory.
I need to go and track down all
the things that we've allocated and
see if any of them are still usable.
Or if they've just become totally
unreachable by all the stuff that's
that's still usable.
And this garbage collection sort
of pass processes like a GC pass.
Is notorious for causing slowdowns and
systems because it can have a lot of
like it can take a lot of performance.
And also it can potentially take
a significant amount of extra memory,
both in terms of
the allocation overhead and
then also in terms of
like the GC pass running.
Depending on the garbage
collection algorithm and how,
like robust the the implementation is.
Actually had a friend who was
working at a company where
they had a really big Java back end.
And their garbage
collection pauses were so
bad that it would actually
take down the whole system.
Because what would happen is,
the services would get so clogged down.
Waiting for the garbage collector
to finish that the load
balancer would conclude
that they must be dead.
They must have gone down
because they was taking so
long to respond to everything and it would
kick them out of the load balancing pool.
And then, this would just happen.
That would cause a cascading failure.
The entire application would go down.
So garbage collection,
it is convenient in the sense that you
basically only worried about allocations.
And then you just let the garbage
collector, take care of the deallocations.
But, it does have this pretty serious
downside of performance which can in
some cases actually lead to failures.